
-->What is Compiler?

   A compiler is a computer program that transforms code written in a high-level programming language into the machine code. 
   It is a program which translates the human-readable code to a language a computer processor understands (binary 1 and 0 bits). 
   The computer processes the machine code to perform the corresponding tasks.
   A compiler should comply with the syntax rule of that programming language in which it is written. 
   However, the compiler is only a program and can not fix errors found in that program. 
   So, if you make a mistake, you need to make changes in the syntax of your program. 
   Otherwise, it will not compile.

-->What is Interpreter?

   An interpreter is a computer program, which converts each high-level program statement into the machine code. 
   This includes source code, pre-compiled code, and scripts. 
   Both compiler and interpreters do the same job which is converting higher level programming language to machine code. 
   However, a compiler will convert the code into machine code (create an exe) before program run. 
   Interpreters convert code into machine code when the program is run.

-->KEY DIFFERENCE

1) Compiler transforms code written in a high-level programming language into the machine code, at once, before program runs, 
   whereas an Interpreter converts each high-level program statement, one by one, into the machine code, during program run.

2) Compiled code runs faster while interpreted code runs slower.
   
   Compiler displays all errors after compilation, 
   on the other hand, the Interpreter displays errors of each line one by one.
   
   Compiler is based on translation linking-loading model, 
   whereas Interpreter is based on Interpretation Method.
   
   Compiler takes an entire program whereas the Interpreter takes a single line of code.

-->ROLE OF COMPILER

1) Compliers reads the source code, outputs executable code.
   
   It translates software written in a higher-level language into instructions that computer can understand. 
   It converts the text that a programmer writes into a format the CPU can understand.
   
   The process of compilation is relatively complicated. 
   It spends a lot of time analyzing and processing the program.
   
   The executable result is some form of machine-specific binary code.

-->ROLE OF INTERPRETER
   
2) The interpreter converts the source code line-by-line during RUN Time.
   
   Interpret completely translates a program written in a high-level language into machine level language.
 
   Interpreter allows evaluation and modification of the program while it is executing.
   
   Relatively less time spent for analyzing and processing the program
   
   Program execution is relatively slow compared to compiler